---
title: Meditation Tools and Muscles
date: 2020-02-18
tags:
  - habits
  - meditation
---

I have been meditating on and off since last June - around 8 months now. I don't
have much experience with it yet, and I'll try not to sell it in this post.
Instead, my goal is to share the tools I'm using, a bit of my path into
meditation with each of them, and some of the mental muscles that I'm now
thinking about in my daily minutes.

# Breathe

When I first got an Apple Watch, I decided to try out the
[Breathe](https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT206999) app. My first round of
habits were to do it before bed and after runs in the park.

I immediately enjoyed the benefits - choosing to sit quietly and match my
breathing to the wrist vibrations calmed me down, and gave me much
needed mental space.

I tend to work hard to capture every single thought and dream, every little todo
item whenever it comes to mind. This stems from Getting Things Done and years of
journaling - my post from yesterday includes [some
tools](/2020-02-17-mobile-writing-capture-tools/) to help
make that capture even easier. I've always enjoyed enumerating all my thoughts
to get my mind clear.

However, after years of doing this, I'm starting to realize how much I take for
granted the cost of processing all these thoughts. It's a drag to have a huge
todo list, and all the time! I need to cut that thing down!

Using Breathe was eye-opening for me - trying to keep my mind on breathing, I
found all kinds of thoughts, memories, projections surfacing, coming and going.
Often, I'd finish five minutes and scramble for post-it notes or a journal page
to start getting the thoughts down. Over time, I started to accept that these
things are ok to let go. The thoughts are ok to have! Things will be ok if they
don't get captured.

I've thought of journaling in the past as way to process my thoughts. I always
write down where I am, what's been going on since the last entry, and what I
think of that. It's a first shot at some emotions, even if it's written
plain-as-day. If I didn't write it down, I'd sometimes come back to difficult
situations in the same mental state as I'd left them - I hadn't actually
processed my emotions yet.

Breathe taught me that this kind of processing _can_ happen in my head. I'd follow
the breathing and let my mind wander wherever it wanted to - and I really
enjoyed it!

I told some friends the above takeaways from Breathe, and they made a
distinction between the above 'Mindfulness' and 'Meditation' itself. I was
making no effort to clear my head, I was actually creating space for thoughts,
then filling that space immediately. I think there are benefits to both, but at
the time, Meditation felt like it'd be different, it'd be work, and it wouldn't
give me room to think about whatever ideas I wanted.

# Calm

I started doing [Calm](https://www.calm.com/)'s 'Daily Calm' in conjunction with
some of the evening breathe I was doing. These are guided meditations, usually
10 minutes at a time.

Before trying it, I thought I'd be put off by the guided aspect, but it turns
out I needed it. This was an easy, relaxing way to learn to meditate. If my mind
was too busy to calm down on its own, here's a guide. Just do what they say.

The guided aspect let me be a bit lazy, because all I had to do was sit and turn
it on. But the guides gave me some advice and lessons. I enjoyed the Jeff
Warren's [How to
Meditate](https://app.www.calm.com/program/mVcvqWcR8C/how-to-meditate) course so
much that I'm on my second way through it now. Note that it did take me ~60 days
to finish the first time. Habits are hard to start sometimes!

Calm has other things worth listening to as well, but I'll leave it to you to
explore. I'm proud to day I'm currently on a 33 day streak!

# New Muscles?

Calm's How to Meditate course covers four mental muscles. Here I want to touch
on each one, mostly as practice for articulating them.

#### Concentration

Concentration usually makes me think of someone with a crease in their eyebrow.
In this context, that is not the expression you want. Instead, relax, and just
start noticing where your mind is.

Working your concentration muscle is simple. Every time you bring your focus
back to your current task or your home base, that's your "bench press with the
universe." Get your reps in!

#### Clarity

If bringing your attention back to your current task is practicing
concentration, noticing and observing where your mind is in the first place is
Clarity.

Meditation give us the opportunity to study what our minds are doing at rest.
For example, mine likes to brainstorm feature ideas for whatever project I'm
currently obsessing with, and then examine my recent social history for
guilt-opportunities (gopportunities).

Noticing and observing your own tendencies is a huge step toward understanding
yourself, and will lead to more clarity in your own life.

#### Equanimity

Equanimity is being ok with things - not letting it affect you. For me, it's
maintaining a sense of calm in the face of something that really annoys me, or
when I feel manic or excited about something.

I think it's easy to look for this when situations are dramatic, but it may be
more important in the small, in the every day. It's easy to get annoyed by
other people's habits, or when a personal routine gets cut off or upset by some
obstruction. Equanimity is the counter to that negative, reactive energy.

#### Friendliness

Practicing friendliness means going easy on yourself and others. If your
concentration is slipping, that's ok. Give yourself a break and be glad you're
here and trying today.

Meditations on gratitudes and affirmations are common, but for real value from
those, you need to first be kind, forgiving, and caring with yourself.

I'm still working on this one. Something about repeating phrases feels too
monotonous for now.

### My take on these is second hand.

I definitely recommend that Calm course from Jeff Warren! If you're interested
but don't want to sign up for Calm, you can at least check out [this
post](https://blog.calm.com/blog/two-things-i-did-wrong-when-i-started-meditating)
he wrote up about starting meditation.

# Habits are hard! Go easy on yourself

It's ok to drop them and pick them back up. Be a prefectionist tomorrow.

I've been journaling for about 10 years. How? It's easy to keep something up for
that long if you let yourself pick it back up again after realizing you forgot
to do it for two months. Give yourself a break! You're doing fine.
