```
title: "Dot Hop Rearchitecting"

tags:
  - devlog
  - dothop
```

# Devlog: Dot Hop Rearchitecting

Heya, time for another DevLog! Here's what I've been up to!

[Last week](https://russmatney.com/#/devlogs/2025-06-10-dothop-speedrun) I
generated a mess of puzzle stats and spoilers - this week, I'm in more of a
hand-written mood.

## I've been Dot Hop Refactoring

I originally threw Dot Hop together in a bit of a frenzy - most of the Godot
side was written to hit a self-imposed March 1st, 2024 deadline. I went on to
dive into my next release (Dino) under similar pressure, and then the rest of
last year was spent investing in other group projects and programs.

In the meantime, I've come a long way in my understanding of Godot - and I was
excited to see how much room for improvement Dot Hop's code has accumulated.

I'm driving toward Dot Hop's 2.0 release! There has been very positive feedback
and lots of ideas about how to extend the game's current design. I have a
gigantic org file full of ideas for mechanics, themes, systems, game modes, etc.

Some shares from that:

<img src= "_images/dothop/org_file_share_1.png" />

<img src= "_images/dothop/org_file_share_2.png" />

<img src= "_images/dothop/org_file_share_3.png" />

<img src= "_images/dothop/org_file_share_4.png" />

That's an awful lot of ideas to manage....

As always, the first priority is to over-engineer the thing, optimizing for more
experimentation and flexibility. We want it to be cheap to throw together a new
game mode, especially in a way that players can test and share feedback. It's
all about that feedback loop! Engineers, designers, game devs in general should
get feedback as quickly as possible!

Enter Dot Hop's former architecture: A giant `GameScene` and an even larger
`PuzzleScene`. Highly coupled, handling everything: game logic, transition
animations, sounds and music, inputs... It's overloaded in there!

This setup does not make it easy to swap in ideas without breaking everything.
I'm committed to maintaining Dot Hop's current mode (called `ClassicMode` right
now). But I also want to do totally different rules, progressions, behaviors,
etc.

In the last two weeks, I've been prying all of this apart:

- Pulled Game Logic into `PuzzleState` and `PuzzleAnalysis` objects
- Decomposed the `GameScene` into sibling `GameSounds`, `GameMusic`, `ClassicMode`,
  `PuzzleTransitions`, and other nodes

Next I'm going to dig into the `PuzzleScene` again, separating (at least) input
handling and hopefully the theme integrations.

Much of this cleanup is made simple via an Event Bus pattern - thank you to
[Eric/Baja The Frog's Godot Con talk](https://youtu.be/yB3Wv-Lr7pg). I saw the
talk in person and enjoyed rewatching it last night to really solidify the
Call-Down, Signal-Up, Event-Out thinking.

> You can find some of the commits for this refactor in [Dot Hop's
> Changelog](https://russmatney.github.io/dothop/#/changelog?id=_24-jul-2025).


# Quick hits this week

## Google Play "Open Beta" does not mean free!

I learned a lesson recently: getting a game into 'Open Beta' on the Google Play
store does NOT let players play for free!

I had fully assumed sharing a beta with folks would not charge them - I'd taken
parallel steps in the Apple App Store to share with folks via TestFlight.

Imagine my surprise to learn I'd already sold 4 copies of Dot Hop on Google
Play! To who, I'm not sure, but yep, Google's already sent me that money.

Meanwhile I'm sitting here preparing, refactoring, planning in "secret" for my
big mobile launch! Ah well. The game is on the Google Play store now if you want
(to pay) to take a crack at it! Or just ping me and I'll get you a `.pck` or
`.pba` or `.pbwhateveritis`.

## Coming soon to Flathub... for free?

I was encouraged to add Dot Hop to [Flathub](https://flathub.org/) by
[Cassidy](https://cassidyjames.com/) at [Endless](https://www.endlessos.org/) -
seems like a great way to reach a new audience!

I was a bit concerned at first to learn Flathub isn't actually an 'app store'
yet, as they don't support purchases/payments/paywalls at all. It's more of a
linux package manager with a focus on full-on applications (vs software
libraries).

This sparked some deeper thinking about Dot Hop's current place in the market.
What is this thing? Should it just be free? Isn't it already open-source?

I'm open to it being completely free, but will need to think and plan more. For
now I'm going to focus on sharing openly and getting more player feedback - if
folks want to play via flathub, that's got to help the game get better. I'll
suggest a donation via [Ko-fi](https://ko-fi.com/russmatney), and likely keep
the $3.99 price on Steam/iOS/Android.

## Where to play? Where to buy?

These free or paid questions have inspired a where-to-play/buy bit of Dot Hop's
docs (that I will write shortly).

Related, you can pay-what-you-want for Dot Hop on itch. At the moment that
version hasn't been updated in over a year (same for the Steam version), but
along with this FlatHub push I'm going to get a new version (`1.2`) out
everywhere in the next week or so.

- TODO link to this doc in dothop's docsify

## My first GitHub Sponsor!

I was extremely happy to get my first ever Github Sponsor this week, in the form
of [Gramps](https://github.com/Gramps), who maintains (among other things) an
excellent Godot<>Steam integration.

Gramps said this was Log.gd inspired, and that he's using Log.gd in all his
projects now.

> Me too dude! Can't live without it!

This sponsorship directly inspired a new version of Log this week (`v0.0.8`)
which features...

## Rainbow Delimiters!

[Log.gd](https://russmatney.github.io/log.gd/#/) is all about readability - it
wants to reduce the effort of reading your logs. Rainbow Delimiters is a tool
for cycling colors when nesting parens and brackets - the colors make it more
clear when this or that object starts and ends.

<img src= "_images/log-gd/rainbow-delims.png" />
<img src= "_images/log-gd/rainbow-delims-small.png" />

I was surprised it hadn't occurred to me sooner to add this, and I was very
happy with how easily it fit into Log's code. Afterward, I also added the
color-cycling for dictionary keys, which I think is a nice touch.

One step further could be to include some `bgcolor` per object - I'll do some
testing with this before shipping it, but it might be just what the Godotctor
ordered.

<img src= "_images/log-gd/rainbow-delims-object.png" />


# More Dot Hop Things

## Running Puzzle Analysis in the Background

I've worked with Threads in Godot before, but it always feels a little sharp -
you've got to be responsible and clean up after yourself, and it can be easy to
lose a thread and leave the game hanging.

The Puzzle Analysis code is not designed to be efficient - we could get into
why, but I decided to focus on getting it into the background first. Even if the
analysis is fast, I wanted to level up the architecture - no need to wait for
anything if we can keep things running smoothly.

## An Input Plugin for parsing puzzles from plaintext

I created my first godot input plugin this week! I had been parsing puzzles from
.txt files at runtime, but now those `.txt`s are `.puzz`s, and they can be
treated as full-on Godot Resources. This helped to completely cut out a few
in-betweener classes I'd been using (e.g. the `GameDef` is no more!).

<img src= "_images/dothop/puzzle_set_data_resource.png" />

The raw .puzz files look like this:

<img src= "_images/dothop/raw_puzz_file.png" />

## A fun 'bug' slash chaotic puzzle visualization

I've been hacking on a Puzzle 'Browser' of sorts - it's been helpful to have
another consumer of the `PuzzleScene` to make it clear what the `GameScene` had
been responsible for.

Last night, much of the refactoring was coming together - Puzzle Analysis
running in the background (if it's not already cached), Puzzles rebuilding
somewhat reasonably.

I say somewhat - you'll see in the clip - here's what happens when you forget to
remove the puzzle_node before adding a new one!

<img src= "_images/dothop/puzzle_stacking.gif" />

I love this chaos - I'm wondering if I can use it as a background/banner or some
other fun thing.

Once I get the `PuzzleScene` code minimized, it should be easy to throw puzzle
nodes around, maybe to juice up the main menu?

It's a mess but it also made me very happy. I love bugs like these.

# That's a wrap!

Thanks for tuning in to my game dev adventure!

If you want to play Dot Hop on mobile, feel free to reach out - I love showing
people my little playtester site.

Happy trails, game devs!


