---
title: "things_i_like_in_games"
category: notes
---

<!--- HELLO WORLD!!! 
  this page was GENERATED by some tasks.clj!
  so-mind-ya-bizniz. --->



---
title: "My Favorite Things in Games"
tags:
  - favorites
  - games
  - post
  - published
---


This might make for a good devlog.

--

Inspired by NaNoWriMo's "magna carta"s, this is a list of things in games that
I've liked.

They are here as inspiration, motivation, and as a tribute. I hope to
borrow/steal/remix/create with this, to give my own games a bit of the joy these
brought me.

These should help step towards the principles I care about in games. What themes
are threaded through all these?

See also:

- games i love
- JUICY (juice in games)
- Best Game Talks
# secrets
# rewind/replay of big moments
## super meat boy's all-at-once replay
## towerfall's last-death-rewind replay
# last-time review / catch-up
last time, on x

- pokemon started doing this at some point
- before tv show episodes
# easy pickup and play
# Blending in with AI
- hidden in plain sight

the game and the concept
# Fog of War
games! chess?
# NPCs: personal, quirky, honest
# Fast Restart/Retry
on death, or pause menu
you never die, you are only reborn

- Hotline Miami
- Celeste
- Towerfall
# Telling players to Take A Break
- end of pomodoro
- sword and sworcery

session-based game flow
# Level Completion Percentage on death
- cuphead

ink-stories?
# Progress Meter towards Unlockables
- downwell
- streets of rage 4
# Boss Battles

- Mr X in Streets of Rage
- Metroid Dread
- Cuphead

boss battles
# Choose Your Character
Often with unlockables

- Super Smash Bros
- Streets of Rage
- Cuphead
- TMNT
# Story Flashbacks
- zelda botw
- braid
# Devs that Play their own game
# Elevator Levels
Something about fighting in an elevator is quite fun.

elevator dungeon?

- Streets of Rage
- teenage mutant ninja turtles

super elevator level
# Real-Calendar and Date Features
- animal crossing
- Pokemon Ruby/Diamond

real-time (animal-crossing-day-calendar-weather-style) features

Some things only come out at night.
# Weather Systems
- animal crossing
- zelda botw

real-time (animal-crossing-day-calendar-weather-style) features
weather system (game mechanic)
the weather
# Character Idle Animations
falling asleep when you haven't touched controls for a while

- Toe Jam and Earl
# Knocking Enemies 'Over the Side'
a combat short-cut.

- Streets of Rage
- Super Smash Bros
- Toe Jam and Earl
- teenage mutant ninja turtles
# Luring Enemies into Traps
- Breath of the Wild
# Hitting Enemies with Other Enemies

"Stop hitting yourself!"

Skate's Grab, Jump, Throw Across Screen combo

- Streets of Rage
# Enemies Hitting the 'Camera'

- teenage mutant ninja turtles
- Super Smash Bros
# Falling in the Sewers for a sec

"This cave is creepy"

- teenage mutant ninja turtles
# Side-Dodge, Air-Dodge

- Super Smash Bros
- Towerfall
# in-game coffee shops
# destroy the car!
Those levels in street fighter when you just destroy a car.

- street fighter
# fight 3 people, then mini games
- Super Smash Bros
# break the targets!
- Super Smash Bros
# discovering a new village
# screen wrapping
Moving from one side to the other in Pacman or Towerfall.

- Pacman
- Towerfall
# moving through portals/shortcuts
Moving from room to room through a secret passage in Clue

- Pacman
- Towerfall
- Clue
# dropping bananas
- Mario Kart
# getting a hit with a green shell
- Mario Kart
# alley oops

Since the latest superstrikers, i've wanted to do some kind of arch-ing shot one
on one game. It's all about that alley-oop, that whipping half-court shot.

- Super Mario Strikers
# come-from-behind victories
- Mario Kart via items thunder, red-shell
- NBA Jam via shifting stats/probabilities
# capture the flag
running with the flag, chasing the other team's carrier...

it helps to have a feel for the current state of the game
(zoomed out camera? on-screen map?)
# half-court shots
- the way it whips
- the long-distance
- the random, sometimes-ness of success
- the whoop! when it goes in

- Super Mario Strikers
- NBA Jam (Hangtime)
# meteor smashes
- aka Spike
- aka 'DOWN TOWN'

- Super Smash Bros